# Codebook

This codebook describes the file UCI_HAR_analysis.txt, which is generated by run_analysis.R.

### Explanation

UCI_HAR_analysis is an analysis of a [dataset](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip)
that contains information from an experiment in the field of wearable computing. In this experiment, 30 volunteers ("subjects") were selected, and each performed six activities -- walking, walking upstairs, walking downstairs, sitting, standing, and laying -- with a smartphone attached to their hip. The smartphone's accelerometer and gyroscope recorded information at regular time intervals while the subjects performed their activities, generating several records for each subject-activity pair. For each such record, hundreds of statistics -- means, standard deviations, mins, maxs, etc. -- were calculated. These data were later split by volunteer into two groups: test, which contained 9 volunteers (30% of them), and train, which contained 21 volunteers (70% of them). More information can be found in README.txt in the above dataset.

In run_analysis.R, I combine the two groups from the original dataset into a single, large table. I extract only those statistics related to a mean or a standard deviation ("std"), leaving 86 statistics out of the hundreds provided. Then, for each subject-activity pair, I calculate the mean of each of these 86 statistics. The resulting table, UCI_HAR_analysis.txt, contains 181 rows (180 not including the header of column names) and 88 columns. Each of the second to 181st rows corresponds to a specific subject-activity pair (30 subjects * 6 activities = 180 pairs). The first column records the subject, the second column records the activity, and the third to 88th columns record the means of the 86 selected statistics.

I based the statistics' names (the names of columns 3-88) on the names provided in features.txt, a file in the original dataset, but for convenience I converted them to lowercase and removed non-letter characters. The substring "acc" in a column name refers to the accelerometer, and the substring "gyro" in a column name refers to the gyroscope. The letters x, y, or z in a column name refer to spatial axes.

### Other notes

In the original dataset, vectors of subjects, activities, and statistic names are contained in files separate from the main tables. Names of statistics are contained in features.txt, and names of subjects are contained in subject_train.txt and test_train.txt. Additionally, vectors of activity _numbers_ (integers from 1 to 6) are provided in y_train.txt and y_test.txt, and the six strings corresponding to the numbers are recorded in activity_labels.txt. In my analysis table, UCI_HAR_analysis.txt, all activities are recorded as strings; subjects, activity strings, and statistic names are included directly in the table.

It is recommened that you open UCI_HAR_analysis.txt in R, Excel, or some other program that can process tabular data. The data is difficult to read directly from programs such as Notepad.

### Example

The intersection of the first two rows and three columns of UCI_HAR_analysis.txt are:

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>subject</th>
    <th>activity</th>
    <th>tbodyaccmeanx</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>LAYING</td>
    <td>0.22159824394</td>
  </tr>
</table>

The value 0.22159824394 was calculated from data that came from the smartphone's _accelerometer_ ("acc") and corresponds to the _x axis_. This data was recorded while the _first subject_ (volunteer) was _laying down_. Many records were recorded at regular time intervals while subject 1 lay down, and for each record a value of tbodyaccmeanx was calculated; the value 0.22159824394 is the _mean_ of those values of tbodyaccmeanx.
